Updates to Dictionary Expression spec (#8568)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/dictionary-expressions.md

Several dictionary-like types can created without external BCL support.  These types are:

> 1. Dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; set; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; set; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.
```

> 1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; set; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: I'll update. The spec actually says they only need the get portion

> 1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; set; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.
```

> 1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; set; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Concrete dictionary-like types, containing an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { get; }`, like `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ConcurrentDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>`, and `FrozenDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.
```

> 1. The well-known BCL dictionary interface types: `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>` and `IReadOnlyDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The well-known generic BCL dictionary interface types: `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>` and `IReadOnlyDictionary<TKey, TValue>`.
```
Like with collection expressions, the well-known _non-generic_ BCL dictionary interfaces are not supported.

Currently, all C# programs must use many different and unfortunately verbose approaches to create instances of such values. Some approaches also have performance drawbacks. Here are some common examples:

1. Collection-initializer types, which require syntax like `new Dictionary<X, Y> { ... }` (lacking inference of possibly verbose TKey and TValue) prior to their values, and which can cause multiple reallocations of memory because they use `N` `.Add` invocations without supplying an initial capacity.
1. Immutable collections, which require syntax like `ImmutableDictionary.CreateRange(...)`, but which are also unpleasant due to the need to provide values as an `IEnumerable<KeyValuePair>`.  Builders are even more unwieldy.
1. Read-only dictionaries, which require first making a normal dictionary, then wrapping it.

> 1. Concurrent dictionaries, which lack an `.Add` method, and thus cannot be used with normal collection initializers at all.

Reviewer: (without defining an extension method)

> 1. Concurrent dictionaries, which lack an `.Add` method, and thus cannot be used with normal collection initializers at all.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Concurrent dictionaries, which lack an `.Add` method, and thus cannot easily bed used collection initializers.
```

The following grammar productions are added:

```diff

> + collection_expression

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
collection_expression
```

-  : '[' ']'

> - | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  

Author: ```suggestion
-  | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
```

>   : '[' ']'
> - | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
> + | '[' 'comparer': expression ']'

Author: ```suggestion
-  : '[' ']'
- | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
+ | '[' ( 'comparer' : expression )? ']'
```

>   : '[' ']'
> - | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
> + | '[' 'comparer': expression ']'
>   | '[' ('comparer': expression , )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'

Reviewer: Missing some quotes:
```suggestion
  : '[' ']'
- | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
+ | '[' 'comparer' ':' expression ']'
  | '[' ('comparer' ':' expression ',' )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'
```

This could also be:

```g4
  : '[' ('comparer' ':' expression )? ']'
  | '[' ('comparer' ':' expression ',' )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'
```

>   ;

Author: this is new.  I'm taking an opinionated stance that we just support `comparers`.  We haven't supported any further customization around normal collection expressions, and feedback has been minimal.  I do think comparers are relevant enough for dictionaries (*especially* the preponderance of case insensitive string dictionaries) to warrant syntax.

This syntax isn't great, given that it overlaps `k:v` elements.  However, in practice i expect any collisions to be rare.  And, if they occur, users can write: `@comparer: ...`.  Finally, the IDE will classify `comparer` as a keyword, making it clear that that's what is being provided.

Reviewer: Not spaceship time? /s
`[<=>: StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase, "a": a, "b": b]`

Reviewer: I'd like to consider whether we need this versus telling people to write `TheDictType.Create([a: b, c: d], StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase)`. The BCL could just provide an overload or optional parameter for the comparer, and the performance of this construction path would be no worse than any general CollectionBuilder collection.

Reviewer: So compare these for convenience.

- `[comparer: StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase, a: b, c: d]`
- `TheDictType.Create([a: b, c: d], StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase)`
- `new([a: b, c: d], StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase)`

The latter case would broaden the meaning of `new(` to say it can call constructors and CollectionBuilder Create methods.

Author: i don't think that helps, especially needing a solution for every type.  it also greatly increases teh verbosity.

My thinking on why i want to support this special guy is simply that how hashing/equality working is fundamental to what a dictionary is.  This is unlike other arguments which so far have been more about optimizing performance.

Reviewer: I think our posts crossed, but I want to push back on "greatly increases the verbosity." See https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/8568/files#r1835510207

That is a minor increase in verbosity IMO. And it's lowering the concept count for understanding the syntax, so it pays us back.

> especially needing a solution for every type
Only those types which don't have a `set;` in their indexer, but this is true.

The compiler could address this by resolving `new(` to a constructor with the same parameter set minus the elements, and then sending the elements to the indexer.

Reviewer: Cyrus brought up a great point offline, which is that we'd like to support targeting interface dictionary types with comparers. I agree that this is an important use case, and it definitely rules out `new(` and `Create(` approaches.

> + | '[' ( 'comparer' : expression )? ']'
>   | '[' ('comparer': expression , )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'

Author: ```suggestion
+ : '[' ( 'comparer' : expression )? ']'
+  | '[' ( 'comparer' : expression , )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'
```

> + : '[' ( 'comparer' : expression )? ']'
> +  | '[' ( 'comparer' : expression , )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'

Author: ```suggestion
+  : '[' ( 'comparer' ':' expression )? ']'
+  | '[' ( 'comparer' ':' expression ',' )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'
```

> collection_expression
> -  : '[' ']'
> -  | '[' collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'  
> +  : '[' ( 'comparer' ':' expression )? ']'
> +  | '[' ( 'comparer' ':' expression ',' )? collection_element ( ',' collection_element )* ']'
>   ;

Author: ```suggestion
```

collection_element
  : expression_element
  | spread_element
+ | key_value_pair_element
  ;

+ key_value_pair_element

> +  : expression ':' expression

Author: renamed this since its not exclusive to creating dictionaries.

Author: we could also consider `pair_element`.  but i don't necessarily mind `key_value_pair_element` as we will allow it to convert to `KeyValuePair<,>` in the case of a non-dictionary collection.

Reviewer: I like `key_value_pair_element`. As a fallback, perhaps `associative_element`.

## Design Intuition

There are two core aspects to the design of dictionary expressions. 

> First is the concept of a `dictionary type`. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`T` indexer. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer. `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First is the concept of a *dictionary type*. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`T` indexer. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer. `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.
```

Note: Many rules in this spec will refer to types needing to be the same `KeyValuePair<,>` type.  This is an informal way of saying the types must have an identity conversion between them.  As such, `KeyValuePair<(int X, int Y), object>` would be considered the same type a `KeyValuePair<(int, int), object?>` for the purpose of these rules.

With a broad interpretation of these rules, all of the following would be legal:

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge1 = ["mads": 21, existingKvp]; // as would
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge2 = ["mads": 21, .. existingDict]; // as would
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge3 = ["mads": 21, .. existingListOfKVPS];
```

A dictionary expression can also provide a custom `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` comparer to control its behavior just by including such a value is the first `expression_element` in the expression. For example:

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];

// Or even:
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [StringComparer.CaseInsensitive];
```

> While this approach does reuse `expression_element` both for specifying individual `KeyValuePair<,>`  as well as a comparer for the dictionary, there is no ambiguity here is no types could satisfy both types.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this approach does reuse `expression_element` both for specifying individual `KeyValuePair<,>`  as well as a comparer for the dictionary, there is no ambiguity here as no types could satisfy both types.  
```

Yes.  These are legal: [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

### Answered question 2

Can you spread a *non dictionary type* when producing a dictionary type'd value.  For example:

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge = ["mads": 21, .. existingListOfKVPS];
``` 

**Resolution:** *Spread elements* of key-value pair collections will be supported in dictionary expressions. [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

### Answered question 3

How far do we want to take this KeyValuePair representation of things? Do we allow *key value pair elements* when producing normal collections? For example, should the following be allowed:

```c#
List<KeyValuePair<string, int>> = ["mads": 21];
```

**Resolution:** *Key value pair elements* will be supported in collection expressions for collection types that have a key-value pair element type. [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

### Answered question 4

> Dictionaries provide two ways of initializing their contents.  A restrictive `.Add`-oriented form that throws when a key is already present in the dictionary, used by collection initializers, and a permissive indexer-oriented form which does not, used by dictionary initializers.  The restrictive form is useful for catching mistakes ("oops, I didn't intend to add the same thing twice!"), but is limiting *especially* in the spread case.  For example:

Reviewer 2: The "used by ..." confused me. For `new() { ... }` initializers, dictionaries use `Add()` - see [sharplab.io](https://sharplab.io/#v2:EYLgxg9gTgpgtADwGwBYA+ABADAAgwRhQG4BYAKHIBEBLMAF2ogDsBDKATwB5qm6AaHDzoA+HABMcAXhxMYAdwAUAShwBvNTnwCATDgC+A9doEBmfYc0CU+/USA=).

Consider removing "used by ...":
```suggestion
Dictionaries provide two ways of initializing their contents.  A restrictive `Add`-oriented form that throws when a key is already present in the dictionary, and a permissive indexer-oriented form which does not.  The restrictive form is useful for catching mistakes ("oops, I didn't intend to add the same thing twice!"), but is limiting *especially* in the spread case.  For example:
```

```c#
List<KeyValuePair<string, int>> nameToAge = ["mads": 21];
```

This is just a simple augmentation on top of the existing collection expression rules.  In the above example, the code will be emitted as:

```c#
__result.Add(new KeyValuePair<string, int>("mads", 21));
```

However, if the target type for the collection expression *is* a *dictionary* type, then all `KeyValuePair<,>` produced by `expression_element` or `spread_element` elements will be changed to use the indexer to assign into the resultant dictionary, and any `key_value_pair_element` will use that indexer directly as well.  For example:

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge = ["mads": 21, existingDict.MaxPair(), .. otherDict];

// would be rewritten similar to:

Dictionary<string, int> __result = new();
__result["mads"] = 21;

// Note: the below casts must be legal for the dictionary
// expression to be legal
var __t1 = existingDict.MaxPair();
__result[(string)__t1.Key] = (int)__t1.Value;

foreach (var __t2 in otherDict)
    __result[(string)__t2.Key] = (int)__t2.Value;
```

> Many rules for *dictionary expressions* will correspond to existing rules for *collection expressions*, just requiring aspects such as *element* and *iteration types* to be some `KeyValuePair<,>`.

Author: ```suggestion
Many rules for *dictionary expressions* will correspond to existing rules for *collection expressions*, just requiring aspects such as *element* and *iteration types* to be some `KeyValuePair<,>`.

Note: Many rules in this spec will refer to types needing to be the same `KeyValuePair<,>` type.  This is an informal way of saying the types must have an identity conversion between them.  As such, `KeyValuePair<(int X, int Y), object>` would be considered the same type a `KeyValuePair<(int, int), object?>` for the purpose of these rules.
```

## Design Intuition

There are two core aspects to the design of dictionary expressions. 

> First is the concept of a `dictionary type`. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`.  The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type (as its indexer is from `int` to `KeyValuePair<int, string>`), while `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` would of course be.

Author: i wanted to up front state what we think a dictionary is, and how we separate them out from existing collection types.  Intuition is both that it is strongly attached to KVP as its element type *AND* it has an indexer.  The latter really is how we say a type is announcing its dictionary-ness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First is the concept of a `dictionary type`. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`. The former requirement ensures that `List<T>` is not considered a dictionary type, with it's `int`-to-`T` indexer. The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type, with its `int`-to-`KeyValuePair<int, string>` indexer. `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` passes both requirements.
```

> First is the concept of a `dictionary type`. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`.  The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type (as its indexer is from `int` to `KeyValuePair<int, string>`), while `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` would of course be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First is the concept of a *dictionary type*. *Dictionary types* are types that are similar to the existing *collection types*, with the additional requirements that they have an *element type* of some `KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>` *and* have an indexer `TValue this[TKey] { ... }`.  The latter requirement ensures that `List<KeyValuePair<int, string>>` is not considered a dictionary type (as its indexer is from `int` to `KeyValuePair<int, string>`), while `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>` is considered a dictionary type.
```

> Second is that collection expressions containing `KeyValuePair<,>`s (coming from `expression_element`s, `spread_element`s, or `key_value_pair_element`s) can now instantiate a normal `collection type` *or* a `dictionary type`.  

Reviewer 2: I find trailing "s" interrupts reading flow. Consider dropping:
```suggestion
Second is that collection expressions containing `KeyValuePair<,>` (coming from `expression_element`, `spread_element`, or `key_value_pair_element`) can now instantiate a normal *collection type* *or* a *dictionary type*.
```

> Second is that collection expressions containing `KeyValuePair<,>`s (coming from `expression_element`s, `spread_element`s, or `key_value_pair_element`s) can now instantiate a normal `collection type` *or* a `dictionary type`.  

Author: i also wanted to make it clear up front that `k:v` is not restrictedd to dictionary types, nor is it required to make a dictionary type.  It's just a really convenient shorthand that we will expect to be *primarily* used with dictionary types.  but it is both optional to use there, and can still be used for normal collections.

So, if the target type for a collection expression is some *collection type* (that is *not* a *dictionary type*) with an element of `KeyValuePair<,>` then it can be instantiated like so:

```c#
List<KeyValuePair<string, int>> nameToAge = ["mads": 21];
```

This is just a simple augmentation on top of the existing collection expression rules.  In the above example, the code will be emitted as:

```c#

> __result.Add(KeyValuePair.Create("mads", 21));

Author: ```suggestion
__result.Add(new KeyValuePair<string, int>("mads", 21));
```

```

> However, if the target type for the collection expression *is* a *dictionary* type, then all `KeyValuePair<,>`s produced by `expression_element` or `spread_element` elements will be changed to use the indexer to assign into the resultant dictionary, and any `key_value_pair_element` will use that indexer directly as well.  For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if the target type for the collection expression *is* a *dictionary* type, then all `KeyValuePair<,>` produced by `expression_element` or `spread_element` elements will be changed to use the indexer to assign into the resultant dictionary, and any `key_value_pair_element` will use that indexer directly as well.  For example:
```

Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge3 = ["mads": 21, .. existingListOfKVPS];
```

> A dictionary can also have a custom comparer provided through the use of a special `comparer: ...` provided at the start of the expression.  For example:

Author: ```suggestion
A dictionary expression can also provide a custom `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` comparer to control its behavior just by including such a value is the first `expression_element` in the expression. For example:
```

```c#

> Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];

Author: ```suggestion
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];
```

// Or even:

> Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive];

Author: ```suggestion
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [StringComparer.CaseInsensitive];
```

```

> The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  This is in line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (like setting initial capacity).

Author: ```suggestion
The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  This is in line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (like setting initial capacity).  While this approach does reuse `expression_element` both for specifying individual `KeyValuePair<,>`  as well as a comparer for the dictionary, there is no ambiguity here is no types could satisfy both types.
```

Dictionary<string, int> nameToAge3 = ["mads": 21, .. existingListOfKVPS];
```

> A dictionary can also have a custom comparer provided through the use of a special `comparer: ...` provided at the start of the expression.  For example:

Author: i cleaned up answered questions.

```c#
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive, .. existingMap];

// Or even:
Dictionary<string, int> caseInsensitiveMap = [comparer: StringComparer.CaseInsensitive];
```

> The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  In line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (like setting initial capacity).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  This is in line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (like setting initial capacity).
```

> The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  In line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (for example, for setting initial capacity).

Author: ```suggestion
The motivation for this is due to the high number of cases of dictionaries found in real world code with custom comparers.  Support for any further customization is not provided.  In line with the lack of support for customization for normal collection expressions (like setting initial capacity).
```

```c#
Dictionary<string, Option> optionMap = [opt1Name: opt1Default, opt2Name: opt2Default, .. userProvidedOptions];
```

Or, conversely:

```c#
Dictionary<string, Option> optionMap = [.. Defaults.CoreOptions, feature1Name: feature1Override];
```

Which approach should we go with with our dictionary expressions? Options include:

1. Purely restrictive.  All elements use `.Add` to be added to the list.  Note: types like `ConcurrentDictionary` would then not work, not without adding support with something like the `CollectionBuilderAttribute`.
2. Purely permissive.  All elements are added using the indexer.  Perhaps with compiler warnings if the exact same key is given the same constant value twice.
3. Perhaps a hybrid model.  `.Add` if only using `k:v` and switching to indexers if using spread elements.  There is deep potential for confusion here.

**Resolution:** Use *indexer* as the lowering form. [LDM-2024-03-11](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/meetings/2024/LDM-2024-03-11.md#conclusions)

> ### Open question 1

Author: ```suggestion
### Question: Allow deconstructible types?
```

> ### Open question 1

Author: we still have a couple of open questions.  but i put my strong feedback on what we should do here.

Reviewer: Are there any meeting notes linking to this header? I'd like to give headers stable names that don't change as things get answered.

Author: I think the plan is to link to actual commit shas + headers.  That way the notes can always reference anything, even as teh spec changes.  It also allows the final spec to be winnowed to only what is needed.  i will be adding headers here htough.

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?

List<Pair<int, string>> pairs = ...;
Dictionary<int, string> map2 = [.. pairs]; // ?
```

Similarly, instead of `KeyValuePair<,>` we could allow *any* type deconstructible to two values? For example:

```c#
record struct Pair<X, Y>(X x, Y y);

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?
```

> Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Only allow KeyValuePairs for now.  Do not do anything with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed later if there is sufficient motivation.

Author: ```suggestion
Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Only allow `KeyValuePair<,>` for now.  Do not do anything with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed later if there is sufficient motivation.
```

### Question: Types that support both collection and dictionary initialization

> We will support *key value pair elements* for C#12 collection expression target types. Which approach should we use for initialization for those types?

Reviewer 2: From the example and options below, it sounds like the question is about valid C#12 syntax rather than `key_value_pair_element`. Consider clarifying, perhaps:
```suggestion
C# 12 supports collection types where the element type is some `KeyValuePair<,>`, where the type has an applicable `Add()` method that takes a single argument. Which approach should we use for initialization if the type also includes an indexer?
```

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?

List<Pair<int, string>> pairs = ...;
Dictionary<int, string> map2 = [.. pairs]; // ?
```

> Similarly, instead of `KeyValuePair<,>` we could allow *any* type deconstructible to two values.  for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, instead of `KeyValuePair<,>` we could allow *any* type deconstructible to two values? For example:
```

```c#
record struct Pair<X, Y>(X x, Y y);

Dictionary<int, string> map1 = [pair1, pair2]; // ?
```

> Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Only allow KeyValuePairs for now.  Do not do anythning with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed later if there is sufficient motivation.   

Author: ```suggestion
Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Only allow KeyValuePairs for now.  Do not do anything with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed later if there is sufficient motivation.
```

> Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Allow anything deconstructible into two values (which includes `KeyValuePair`s as well as user types).  It is reasonable to have domain specific types that represent pairs, and to want to then make maps from those.  Making this pleasant, without requiring contortions to do the mapping explicitly would enable powerful and succinct code. 

Author: the more i thought about this the more i could not come up with a reason to not allow it.  And i *know* users commonly use things like tuples to create interim pairs of things that finally get made into a collection.  Working with KVPs themselves is *unweildy* in many cases (especially due to lack of dedicated language syntax *outside* of what we're adding to collection expressions here).  So tuples are commonly used instead.  being able to say: `Dict<string, int> d = [.. tuplesIveCreated]` is *really* nice.  as are things like `Dict<string, int> d = [.. existingDict.Select(kvp => (kvp.Key, kvp.Value + 1))]`.  Forcing `new KeyValuePair<...>(...)` or `KeyValuePair.Create(...)` here is onerous.

Author: Note: we could also take this further when creating collection expressions.  for example:

```c#
List<Point> points = [x1: y1, x2: y2];
```

Namely that not only would we use deconstruction to get the components to create KVPs out of, but that we could also create arbitrary values constructible from two elements.  However, i don't feel that this that necessary.  Especially as one can do: `[new(x1, y1), ...]` which is fairly reasonable.  I think *creation* of arbitrary types (especially as they may allocate) may be a bridge too far.

> Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Allow anything deconstructible into two values (which includes `KeyValuePair`s as well as user types).  It is reasonable to have domain specific types that represent pairs, and to want to then make maps from those.  Making this pleasant, without requiring contortions to do the mapping explicitly would enable powerful and succinct code. 

Author: ```suggestion
Resolution: TBD.  Working group recommendation: Only allow KeyValuePairs for now.  Do not do anythning with tuples and/or other deconstructible types.  This is also something that could be relaxed later if there is sufficient motivation.   
```

> ### Open question 2

Author: ```suggestion
### Question: Types that support both collection and dictionary initialization
```

> We will support *dictionary elements* for C#12 collection expression target types. Which approach should we use for initialization for those types?

Author: ```suggestion
We will support *key value pair elements* for C#12 collection expression target types. Which approach should we use for initialization for those types?
```

For example, consider a type like so:

```c#
public class Hybrid<TKey, TValue> : IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>>
{
    public void Add(KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue> pair);
    public TValue this[TKey key] { ... }
}

// This would compile in C# 12:
// Translating to calls to .Add.
Hybrid<string, int> nameToAge = [someKvp];
```

Options include:

1. Use applicable instance indexer if available; otherwise use C#12 initialization.
2. Use applicable instance indexer if available; otherwise report an error during construction (or conversion?).
3. Use C#12 initialization always.

> Resolution TBD.  Working group recommendation: Use applicable instance indexer only.  This ensures that everything dictionary-like is initialized in a consistent fashion.  This would be a break in behavior when recompiling.  The view is that these types would be rare.  And if they exist, it would be nonsensical for them to behave differently using the indexer versus the .Add (outside of potentially throwing behavior).

Author: i again took the strong opinoin that if you have an indexer, you are a dictionary, with dictionary semantics and we should use that.  Existing .Adds were likely to bridge to that anyways.  Feel free to disagree with me here

Reviewer: I'm okay with the silent switch from "throw on duplicate" to "overwrite on duplicate."

* A *dictionary type* with an appropriate *[create method](#create-methods)*.
* A *struct* or *class* *dictionary type* that implements `System.Collections.IEnumerable` where:
  * The *element type* is determined from a `GetEnumerator` instance method or enumerable interface.

>   * The *type* has an *[applicable](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/expressions.md#11642-applicable-function-member)* constructor that can be invoked with no arguments (*or* a constructor with an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` parameter), and the constructor is accessible at the location of the collection expression.

Reviewer: What would we like the compiler to do when the `comparer` parameter type is a subtype of `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`, e.g. `new MyStringDictionary(StringComparer comparer)`?

Author: Good point.  this should be something assignable to `IEQ<TKey>`

>   * The *type* has an *[applicable](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/expressions.md#11642-applicable-function-member)* constructor that can be invoked with no arguments (*or* a constructor with an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` parameter), and the constructor is accessible at the location of the collection expression.

Author: ```suggestion
  * The *type* has an *[applicable](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/standard-v6/standard/expressions.md#11642-applicable-function-member)* constructor that can be invoked with no arguments (*or* a constructor with a single parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`), and the constructor is accessible at the location of the collection expression.
```

>   * The *indexer* has a setter that is as accessible as the declaring type.

Reviewer: I forget why this is in here. Couldn't extension indexers complicate this?

## Create methods

> A *create method* is indicated with a `[CollectionBuilder(...)]` attribute on the *collection type*.
> The attribute specifies the *builder type* and *method name* of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.

> **A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.**
>
> For the create method:
>   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.

> >    - The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be
> >      called if the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the *single parameter* rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**
```

The runtime has committed to supplying these new CollectionBuilder methods that take `ReadOnlySpan<>` for their immutable collections.

## Construction

The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.

If the target is a dictionary type, and collection expression's first element is an `expression_element`, and the type of that element is convertible to some `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`, then:

1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take a single parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
2. If using a `create method`, the method must have a parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as one of its parameters. The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
3. If creating an interface, this comparer will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.

> **A key_value_pair_element evaluates its interior expressions in order, left to right. In other words, the key is evaluated before the value.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**A `key_value_pair_element` evaluates its interior expressions in order, left to right. In other words, the key is evaluated before the value.**
```

**For each element in order:**

- **If the element is an expression element, the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked with the element expression as the argument. (Unlike classic collection initializer behavior, element evaluation and Add calls are not necessarily interleaved.)**

- **If the target is a dictionary type, then the element must be a `KeyValuePair<,>`. The applicable indexer is invoked with the `.Key` and `.Value` members of that pair.**

> - **If the element is a spread element then one of the following is used:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the element is a *spread element* then one of the following is used:
```

>     - **An applicable GetEnumerator instance or extension method is invoked on the spread element expression and for each item from the enumerator the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked on the collection instance with the item as the argument. If the enumerator implements `IDisposable`, then `Dispose` will be called after enumeration, regardless of exceptions.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **If the target is a collection type, an applicable GetEnumerator instance or extension method is invoked on the spread element expression and for each item from the enumerator the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked on the collection instance with the item as the argument. If the enumerator implements `IDisposable`, then `Dispose` will be called after enumeration, regardless of exceptions.**
```

Author: Same concern about Add vs indexer

Reviewer 2: This bullet is for *collection type*, the next bullet is for *dictionary type*.

## Create methods

> A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.

Reviewer 2: The formatting was dropped previously:
```suggestion
> A *create method* is indicated with a `[CollectionBuilder(...)]` attribute on the *collection type*.
> The attribute specifies the *builder type* and *method name* of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.
```

> > ```diff
> > + A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.
> > ```
> > For the create method:
> >   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > **A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.**
>
> For the create method:
>   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.
```

> > +   - The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be
> > +     called if the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**
> > ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be
>      called if the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**
```

This would allow `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` to be annotated with `[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableDictionary), "CreateRange")]` to light up support for creation.

The runtime has committed to supplying these new CollectionBuilder methods that take `ReadOnlySpan<>` for their immutable collections.

## Construction

The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.

> If the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element`, and the type of that element is convertible to some `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  Then:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the target is a dictionary type, and collection expression's first element is an `expression_element`, and the type of that element is convertible to some `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`, then:
```

1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take a single parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
2. If using a `create method`, the method must have a parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as one of its parameters. The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
3. If creating an interface, this comparer will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.

**A key_value_pair_element evaluates its interior expressions in order, left to right. In other words, the key is evaluated before the value.**

**For each element in order:**

> - **If the element is an expression element, the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked with the element expression as the argument. (Unlike classic collection initializer behavior, element evaluation and Add calls are not necessarily interleaved.)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **If the target is a collection expression, and the element is an expression element, the applicable `Add` instance or extension method is invoked with the element expression as the argument. (Unlike classic collection initializer behavior, element evaluation and `Add` calls are not necessarily interleaved.)**
```

Author: Should this mention the indexer, not the add method?

Reviewer 2: This bullet is for *collection type* and uses `Add`. The next bullet is for *dictionary type* and indexer.

## Create methods

~~A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.~~

~~A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.~~

~~For the create method:~~
   - ~~The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.~~

**A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.**

**A create method will commonly use the name CreateRange in the dictionary domain.**

**For the create method:**

1. **The method must have a single parameter of type `System.ReadOnlySpan<E>`, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.**

> 2. **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression includes an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**

Author: ```suggestion
2. **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**
```

This would allow `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` to be annotated with `[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableDictionary), "CreateRange")]` to light up support for creation.

The runtime has committed to supplying these new CollectionBuilder methods that take `ReadOnlySpan<>` for their immutable collections.

## Construction

The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.

> 1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take a single parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  The `comparer:` expression will be converted to this type.

Author: ```suggestion
If the collection expression's first element is an `expression_element`, and the type of that element is convertible to some `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  Then:

1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take a single parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
```

> 2. If using a `create method`, the method must have a parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as one of its parameters. The `comparer:` expression will be converted to this type.

Author: ```suggestion
2. If using a `create method`, the method must have a parameter whose type is convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as one of its parameters. The first `element_expression` value will be passed to this parameter.
```

> 3. If creating an interface, the `comperer:` expression must be convertible to `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  This comparer will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.

Author: ```suggestion
3. If creating an interface, this comparer will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.
```

## Create methods

> ~~A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.~~

Author: ```suggestion
A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.
```

> ~~A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.~~

Author: ```suggestion
A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.
```

**A create method will commonly use the name CreateRange in the dictionary domain.**

**For the create method:**

1. **The method must have a single parameter of type `System.ReadOnlySpan<E>`, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.**
2. **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression includes an `expression_element` that is convertible to that parameter type.**

This would allow `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` to be annotated with `[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableDictionary), "CreateRange")]` to light up support for creation.

The runtime has committed to supplying these new CollectionBuilder methods that take `ReadOnlySpan<>` for their immutable collections.

## Construction

The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.

> If the collection expression includes a `comparer: expression`, that `expression` will be evaluated before the subsequence elements are evaluated.  If present:

Author: ```suggestion
```

~~A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.~~

~~For the create method:~~
   - ~~The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.~~

**A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.**

**A create method will commonly use the name CreateRange in the dictionary domain.**

**For the create method:**

1. **The method must have a single parameter of type `System.ReadOnlySpan<E>`, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type, or the method has a single parameter of `IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>>` and iteration type of the collection type is the same `KeyValuePair<,>` type.**

> 2. **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the second follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression includes an initial `comparer: expression`.**

Author: ```suggestion
2. **The method has two parameters, where one is convertible to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the other follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above. This method will be called if the collection expression includes an initial `comparer: expression`.**
```

## Create methods

~~A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.~~

~~A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.~~

~~For the create method:~~

>    - ~~The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.~~

Reviewer 2: Why mark this section as deleted and replaced? It looks like it hasn't changed.

Reviewer 2: Actually, the `CreateRange` statement is new to this proposal, so that should be bold, but the statements before and after appear unchanged.

Author: i thought you asked me to do that.  thi sis why i had a diff before.  :)

Author: my preference is just o write the new part, and have normal github diff be the diff mechanism.

> For the create method:
>   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type.
>    - ```diff
>      + Or, the method has a single parameter of
>      + `IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>>` and iteration type

> >      + of the collection type is the same `KeyValuePair<,>` type. 

Reviewer: I don't see why we would tie this to KVP

>   - The method has two parameters, where the first is an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the second follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above.  This method will be called if the collection expression includes an initial `comparer: expression`.

> > ```

Reviewer 2: Let's use **bold** for the changes rather than `diff`:

> A create method is indicated with a [CollectionBuilder(...)] attribute on the collection type. The attribute specifies the builder type and method name of a method to be invoked to construct an instance of the collection type.
> 
> **A create method will commonly use the name `CreateRange` in the dictionary domain.**
>
> For the create method:
>   - The method must have a single parameter of type System.ReadOnlySpan<E>, passed by value, and there is an identity conversion from E to the iteration type of the collection type, **or the method has a single parameter of `IEnumerable<KeyValuePair<TKey, TValue>>` and iteration type of the collection type is the same `KeyValuePair<,>` type.**
>   - The method has two parameters, where the first is an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` and the second follows the rules of the 'single parameter' rule above.  This method will be called if the collection expression includes an initial `comparer: expression`.

This would allow `ImmutableDictionary<TKey, TValue>` to be annotated with `[CollectionBuilder(typeof(ImmutableDictionary), "CreateRange")]` to light up support for creation.

### Question: Efficient 'Create' methods

We could consider not adding this rule, and instead still require the create method to take a `ReadOnlySpan<E>`.  However, that would require the BCL to then add such a method to `ImmutableDictionary` as the existing `CreateRange` methods take an `IEnumerable`.

Conclusion: TBD.  Working group recommendation.  We will defer to the BCL here.  They will have to add `[CollectionBuilder]` annotations to light up anyways.  They can either point these at the existing `CreateRange` methods, or they could point at new methods that take spans.

> Pointing at the existing method would have the positive that it would add to the BCL surface area.  But it would have the negative of forcing going through interfaces to create an immutable dictionary.

Reviewer 2: "... not add to"?
```suggestion
Pointing at the existing method would have the positive that it would not add to the BCL surface area.  But it would have the negative of forcing going through interfaces to create an immutable dictionary.
```

> Pointing at the existing method would have the positive that it would add to the BCL surface area.  But it would have the negative of forcing going through interfaces to create an immutable dictionary.

Reviewer 2: Consider merging these two paragraphs and simplifying:
```suggestion
Pointing at the existing method would force going through interfaces to create an immutable dictionary.
Pointing at a new method would allow for more efficient, stack-based, initialization, but would increase the BCL surface area.
```

Pointing at a new method would allow for more efficient, stack-based, initialization.  However, it would also increase the BCL surface area.

> BCL might also prefer something like `CreateRange(ReadOnlySpan<TKey> keys, ReadOnlySpan<TValues> values)` such a signature would then allow constant data segments to be pointed at with an dictionary expression like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BCL might also prefer something like `CreateRange(ReadOnlySpan<TKey> keys, ReadOnlySpan<TValues> values)`. Such a signature would then allow constant data segments to be pointed at with a dictionary expression like so:
```

// maps to:
// No stack allocs at all!
private static ReadOnlySpan<int> __keys => [1, 2, 4];
private static ReadOnlySpan<int> __values => [2, 4, 8];
mapping = FrozenDictionary.CreateRange(__keys, __values);
```

## Construction

> The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.
>
> If the collection expression includes a `comparer: expression`, that `expression` will be evaluated before the subsequence elements are evaluated, and will be converted to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  If present:
>
> 1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as the sole parameter which the converted expression will be passed to.
> 2. If using a `create method`, the method must take an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as the first parameter which the converted parameter will be passed to.
> 3. If creating an interface, the converted expression will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.
>

> > ```diff

Reviewer 2: Let's use bold for additions rather than `diff`:
> **A key_value_pair_element evaluates its interior expressions in order, left to right.  In other words, the key is evaluated before the value.**
>
> For each element in order:
>
> - If the element is an expression element, the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked with the element expression as the argument. (Unlike classic collection initializer behavior, element evaluation and Add calls are not necessarily interleaved.)
> 
>     **If the target is a dictionary type, then the element must be a `KeyValuePair<,>`.  The applicable indexer is invoked with the `.Key` and `.Value` members of that pair.**
>
> - If the element is a spread element then one of the following is used:
>   - An applicable GetEnumerator instance or extension method is invoked on the spread element expression and for each item from the enumerator the applicable Add instance or extension method is invoked on the collection instance with the item as the argument. If the enumerator implements IDisposable, then Dispose will be called after enumeration, regardless of exceptions.
> 
>     **If the target is a dictionary-type, the enumerator's element type must be some `KeyValuePair<,>`, and for each of those elements the applicable indexer is invoked on the collection instance with the `.Key` and `.Value` members of that pair.**

> >      + Or, the method have a single parameter of

Author: ```suggestion
>      + Or, the method has a single parameter of
```

Conclusion: TBD.  Working group recommendation.  We will defer to the BCL here.  They will have to add `[CollectionBuilder]` annotations to light up anyways.  They can either point these at the existing `CreateRange` methods, or they could point at new methods that take spans.

Pointing at the existing method would have the positive that it would add to the BCL surface area.  But it would have the negative of forcing going through interfaces to create an immutable dictionary.

Pointing at a new method would allow for more efficient, stack-based, initialization.  However, it would also increase the BCL surface area.

BCL might also prefer something like `CreateRange(ReadOnlySpan<TKey> keys, ReadOnlySpan<TValues> values)` such a signature would then allow constant data segments to be pointed at with an dictionary expression like so:

```c#
FrozenDictionary<int, int> mapping = [1: 2, 2: 4, 4: 8];

// maps to:
// No stack allocs at all!
private static ReadOnlySpan<int> __keys => [1, 2, 4];
private static ReadOnlySpan<int> __values => [2, 4, 8];
mapping = FrozenDictionary.CreateRange(__keys, __values);

> ```

Author: @stephentoub for thoughts. Specifically, would you prefer we don't change the surface area of the BCL and the compiler just redirects to the existing CreateRange methods that take an IEnumerable<KVP>? Or is there appetite for more efficient overloads that you would add that woudl allow efficient stack-allocing of keys and values (or KVPs), and passing those along?

We defer to you here.

Reviewer 3: Adding new API surface area is fine, albeit preferably API surface area that makes sense even without the language feature.

In this particular case, what's the benefit of a create method that takes a `ROS<TKey>` + `ROS<TValue>` rather than one that takes an `ROS<KeyValuePair<TKey,TValue>>`?

Reviewer: I think we aren't sure and are looking for input, but the potential thought was that the spans of key or value, when primitive and constant, could come from the data segment, or something like that. KVP might rule out such an approach for all we know.

## Construction

> The elements of a collection expression are evaluated in order, left to right. Each element is evaluated exactly once, and any further references to the elements refer to the results of this initial evaluation.
>
> If the collection expression includes a `comparer: expression`, that `expression` will be evaluated before the subsequence elements are evaluated, and will be converted to an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>`.  If present:
>
> 1. If using a constructor to instantiate the value, the constructor must take an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as the sole parameter which the converted expression will be passed to.
> 2. If using a `create method`, the method must take an `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` as the first parameter which the converted parameter will be passed to.
> 3. If creating an interface, the converted expression will be used as the equality comparer controlling the behavior of the final type (synthesized or otherwise) instantiated.
>
> ```diff
> + A key_value_pair_element evaluates its interior expressions in order,
> + left to right.  In other words, the key is evaluated before the value. 

> > ```

Author: @stephentoub  for thoughts.  Specifically, would you prefer we don't change the surface area of the BCL and the compiler just redirects to the existing CreateRange methods that take an `IEnumerable<KVP>`?  Or is there appetite for more efficient overloads that you would add that woudl allow efficient stack-allocing of keys and values (or KVPs), and passing those along? 

We defer to you here.

### Mutable interface translation

> Given the target type `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>`,  the type used will be `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`.  Using the normal translation mechanics defined already (including handling of a `comparer: expression` comparer).

Author: ```suggestion
Given the target type `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>`,  the type used will be `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`.  Using the normal translation mechanics defined already (including handling of an initially provided `IEqualityComparer<TKey>` comparer).
```

### Mutable interface translation

> Given the target type `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>`,  the type used will be `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`.  Using the normal translation mechanics defined already.

Author: ```suggestion
Given the target type `IDictionary<TKey, TValue>`,  the type used will be `Dictionary<TKey, TValue>`.  Using the normal translation mechanics defined already (including handling of a `comparer: expression` comparer).
```

What should we do here when targeting `IEnumerable<...>` *and* using `k:v` elements? Produce an ordered sequence, with possibly duplicated values?  Or produce an unordered dictionary, with unique keys?

> Working group recommendation: `IEnumerable<KVP>` is not a dictionary type (as it lacks an indexer).  As such, it has sequential value semantics (and can include duplicates).  This would happen today anyways if someone did `[.. ldm]` and we do not think the presence of a `k:v` element changes how the semantics should work.

Author: Imposing my opinion here :)

## Random open questions

> ### Question 2

Author: ```suggestion
### Question: Parsing ambiguity
```

Parsing ambiguity around: `[a ? [b] : c]`

> Working group recommendation: Use normal parsing here.  So this is would be the same as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]` (a collection expression containing a conditional expression).  If the user wants a key_value_pair_element here they can write: `[(a?[b]) : c]`

Author: Imposing my opinion here :)

Reviewer: Agree. It's far more common to read a conditional expression than a null-safe index expression.

> Working group recommendation: Use normal parsing here.  So this is would be the same as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]` (a collection expression containing a conditional expression).  If the user wants a key_value_pair_element here they can write: `[(a?[b]) : c]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Working group recommendation: Use normal parsing here.  So this would be the same as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]` (a collection expression containing a conditional expression).  If the user wants a `key_value_pair_element` here, they can write: `[(a?[b]) : c]`
```
